---
title: "Empirical Approaches to Risk Metrics and Hedging"
layout: post
---
How to enhance fixed-income DV01-neutral hedging by using One and Two-Variable Regression Hedging with adjustment factors, and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).

# DV01-Neutral Hedging
*Explain the drawbacks to using a DV01-neutral hedge for a bond position.*

DV01 hedging in Fixed Income is predicated on the assumption that the yield of an instrument and the instrument used to hedge it, move in tandem. When hedging with like-for-like securities, this might hold, however, this assumption might not be appropriate in every real-life scenario. Differences in yield calculations require hedge-ratio style adjustments; using a real-yield bond to hedge a nominal-yield bond is an example of this[^1]

[^1]: An example of this would be hedging a US T-Bond position with a Treasury Inflation-Protected Security (TIPS). The TIPS yield is quoted in real terms, as its yield is $Nominal Yield - Inflation$.

If we have a TIPS Bond which yields 1.325% with a DV01 of 0.084, and a T-Bond which yields 3.475% with a DV01 of 0.068, our unadjusted DV01-neutral hedge would be computed as...

$$F_R = 100M \times \frac{0.068}{0.084} = $80.95m$$
 
## Hedge Adjustment Factor
*Describe a regression hedge and explain how it can improve a standard DV01-neutral hedge*, *Calculate the regression hedge adjustment factor, beta* and *Calculate the face value of an offsetting position needed to carry out a regression hedge.*

To account for the changes in yields as mentioned above, we must perform an ordinary-least-squares regression...

$$\Delta y_t^{Normal} = \alpha + \beta y+t^{Real}+\epsilon_t$$

For this example the beta coefficient is 1.0198, meaning that we must adjust our DV01-neutral hedge by applying a 1.0198 hedge ratio.

## Two-Variable Regression Hedging
*Calculate the face value of multiple offsetting swap positions needed to carry out a two-variable regression hedge.*

An alternative approach to a DV01-neutral hedge with an adjustment would be to use a two-variable regression. We can, for example, hedge a 20-year swap with two positions; positions in 10-year and 30-year swaps can be used instead of a single offsetting 20-year swap. The approach to determining the hedge ratios is similar to that of the one-variable regression explained in the section above. In this scenario, a two-variable regression would be undertaken as follows...

$$\Delta y_t^{20} = \alpha + \beta^{10}\Delta y_t^{10} + \beta^{30}\Delta y_t^{30} + \epsilon_t$$

The results for this regression yield a Beta of 22.21% for the 10-year and 77.65% for the 30-year swap.

# Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
*Describe principal component analysis and explain how it is applied to constructing a hedging portfolio.*

PCA aims to describe the risk profile of the term structure using a handful of uncorrelated exposure factors. This approach - at a high level - is done by calculating several Principal Components (e.g. 30 PCs for a 30-year term structure). The sum of the variances of each of these principal components will be equal to the sum of the variances of the individual rates. 
