---
title: "Fundamental Review of the Trading Book"
layout: post
---
Capital allocation based on market risk; liquidity horizons, and more recent rules-based innovations 

*Describe the changes to the Basel framework for calculating market risk capital under the Fundamental Review of the Trading Book (FRTB) and the motivations for these changes*
Under BASEL I, firms were expected to use 99% VAR with a 10-day timeframe. In BASEL II, firms were expected to add a Stressed VAR calculation to their VAR figures. The Fundamental Review of the Trading Book (FRTB) requires that firms use an Expected Shortfall loss figure with a 97.5% confidence level, and to calculate this using an abnormally stressed time - 250 days of abnormally stressed market or firm conditions to be specific. The 97.5% Expected shortfall is roughly the same as the 99%ile VAR, however, if the tails are fatter than they are in a normal distribution, the Expected Shortfall model will account for this much more effectively. 

*Compare the various liquidity horizons proposed by the FRTB for different asset classes and explain how a bank can calculate its expected shortfall using the various horizons*
A liquidity horizon is "the time required to execute transactions that extinguish an exposure to a risk factor, without moving the price of the hedging instruments, in stressed market conditions". Five liquidity horizons are in use now; 10, 20, 60, 120, and 250 days. These are now known as Liquidity Horizon Risk Factors enumerated 1 to 5 respectively. The Internal Models Based Approach involves procedurally shocking each of the liquidity categories and holding others constant. 

*Explain the FRTB revisions to Basel regulations in the following areas:*
*- Classification of positions in the trading book compared to the banking book*
*- Backtesting, profit and loss attribution, credit risk and securitizations*

With regards to the **Trading Book versus the Banking Book**, previously, firms would take advantage of the different capital requirements offered by the trading book versus the banking book by moving capital-dependent assets between both books. Under the FRTB, firms can no longer freely classify an asset for the Trading Book; firms must prove that the asset is tradable and that the risks of holding such an asset are mitigated by the trading desk. Furthermore, assets can only be reclassified on the event of a firmwide change in accounting policy, and even then, the original capital requirements remain in place after such a change is made. 

With regards to **Expected Shortfall Backtesting**, ES measures are not backtested. However, the FRTB recommends using a 1-day VAR with a 99% or 97.5% confidence level. If more than 12 or 30 exceptions are observed at the 99%ile and 97.5%ile levels respectively, firms must use the standardised capital allocation approach. 

With regards to **PnL Attribution**, firms must compare the accuracy of their internal models to actual PnL. This can be done by computing $\frac{Mean of Daily Actual vs. Model PnL}{Standard Deviation of Actual PnL}$. FRTB requires that this be +/- 10%. Firms can also calculate this by $\frac{Variance of Mean of Daily Actual vs. Model PnL}{Variance of Actual Daily PnL}$. This measure has to be +/- 20%; otherwise, firms must use the standardised approach. 

With regards to **Credit Risk**, the FRTB recognises two types of risk; credit spread risk and jump-to-default (JTD) risk. The credit spread risk is simply the risk arising from the chance that the credit spread on the asset might adversely change. The JTD risk is calculated by assuming an immediate default, using a 99% VAR and a 1-year time horizon. 

With regards to **securitisation**, the FRTB essentially undid the work from previous BASEL versions and specified that firms should use the standardized approach for capital allocation. This was done to reduce variation among firms in how they created internal models, which were usable for capital calculations.
