---
title: "The Science of Term Structure Models"
layout: post
---
Risk-Neutral Probabilities, Interest Rate Term Structures, and their use in the valuation of Interest Rate Derivatives and other Fixed Income Products

# Interest Rate Trees
*LO 11a, 11b: Calculate the expected discounted value of a zero-coupon security using a binomial tree and Construct and apply an arbitrage argument to price a call option on a zero-coupon security using replicating portfolios*

Interest rate trees are used to model the evolution of interest rates over time. Bonds can be valued at each node in the tree via **Backward induction**, which is the process of "working backwards" from the final node in the binomial model's tree. 

## Risk Neutral Interest Rate Trees & Drift
*LO 11c, 11d: Define risk-neutral pricing and apply it to option pricing and Distinguish between true and risk-neutral probabilities and apply this difference to interest rate drift*

An interest rate tree may assume that the true probability of an up move and the odds of a down move are equivalent (e.g. 50% for each). In reality, market prices might imply that the odds of up and down moves are not equivalent; in order to account for this, we must use risk-neutral probabilities in the binomial model. Differences between true probabilities and risk-neutral probabilities is known as Interest Rate Drift.

A Risk-Neutral Interest Rate Tree can be created be either adjusting the interest rates, or adjusting the up/down move probabilities on the tree such that the value derived by the model is the same as the current price of an on-the-run bond. 

## Pricing Fixed Income Derivatives
*LO 11e Explain how the principles of arbitrage pricing of derivatives on fixed income securities can be extended over multiple periods*

Options on Fixed Income securities can be valued by
1. Valuing the underlying security using the interest rate tree
2. Calculating the intrinsic value of the option at each node in the tree
3. Calculating the discounted value of the option using the interest rate tree

## Recombining & Non-recombining trees
*LO 11g: Describe the rationale behind the use of recombining trees in option pricing*

A recombining tree is a binomial model tree in which an interest rate in node 2 is the same via two paths - down-up, and up-down. In reality, interest rate trees may not recombine or re-converge in this fashion, and are known as non-recombining trees. Non-recombining trees have "state-dependent volatility". 

## Option Adjusted Spread (OAS)
*LO 11f: Define option-adjusted spread (OAS) and apply it to security pricing*

An option-adjusted spread (OAS) the amount we must add to the discount function in order for the interest rate tree model's calculation to be equal to the market price of the same instrument. For example, if the OAS is 20 basis points, then we would discount a cash flow in a node by 5.2% rather than 5%, for example.

## Constant Maturity Swaps
*LO 11h: Calculate the value of a constant maturity Treasury swap, given an interest rate tree and the risk-neutral probabilities*

A constant maturity treasury swap (CMT Swap) is a swap in which a fixed amount is exchanged for the yield on a U.S. treasury bond. The price of the swap at each node in the tree can be calculated as...
$$Price_{Node N} = \frac{(Payoff_{N,U+1}\times P(U)) + (Payoff_{N,D+1}\times P(D))}{1+\frac{Yield_N}{Compounding\,Periods}}$$

Where...
$$Payoff_N=\frac{Notional}{Compounding\,Periods}\times(Yield_N - Fix)$$

## Node Time Step Granularity
*LO 11i: Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of reducing the size of the time steps on the pricing of derivatives on fixed-income securities*

Reducing the time between each node - for example, from six months between nodes down to one day between nodes - will increase the accuracy of values calculated by the model. However, as the time steps are reduced, complexity and computation requirements increase. 

## Applying the Black-Scholes-Merton Model to Fixed Income Securities
*LO 11j: Evaluate the appropriateness of the Black-Scholes-Merton model when valuing derivatives on fixed income securities*

The Black-Scholes-Merton (BSM) model makes use of assumptions which do not always (or even often) hold true for fixed income instruments: 
- The BSM assumes that instruments have no upper limit to their value; fixed income instruments do, however.
- The BSM keeps risk-free interest rates constant, whereas fixed-income instruments cannot make this assumption due to their almost sole-reliance on the risk-free rate for their price calculation.
- The BSM keeps volatility constant, as with the risk-free rate; as fixed -income instruments approach maturity, their volatilities will decrease.

