---
title: "Credit Risks and Credit Derivatives"
layout: post
---
Pricing risky debt using the Merton model, and Credit Derivatives, which can be used to hedge risk.

# Credit Risks and Credit Derivatives

## The Merton Model
Credit risk refers to the chance that a counterparty will fail to make promised payments and therefore default on its obligations. Two important roles that the credit risk analyst plays is to 1) assess the potential of default by debt claimants and 2) assess the potential of default by derivatives counterparties. 

_LO 21a: Using the Merton model, calculate the value of a firm's debt and equity and the volatility of firm value_

The simplest form firm which you can apply the Merton model to is a non-dividend paying firm with only one outstanding obligation; we also ignore taxes, bankruptcy costs and other frictions. 

The firm has a debt issue of a single zero-coupon bond with a face value of F due at T. If the firm can't pay F at T then the firm is bankrupt and the equityholders recieve nothing. Alternatively if the value of the firm at T - $$V_T$$ is sufficient suchthat the payment can be made, then equityholders have a claim on the balance which is $$V_T - F$$ . This is similar to a call option and therefore the value of equity at T is: 

$$S_T = MAX(V_T - F, 0)$$

For example, the value of the firm's equity at T, $$S_T$$, given the principal amount due is 50m and the total value of the firm is 60m. What is the value of the equity if the firm is only worth 40? 

In scenario 1 you have...$$S_T = MAX(60 - 50, 0) = 10$$

In scenario 2 you have...$$S_T = MAX(40-50, 0) = 0$$

You can perform similar arithmetic to determine what the value of the Debt is at certain times as well. 

**The Value of Equity at Time t**

Using arbitrage pricing for a portfolio of securities that replicates the value of the firm in Merton's formula for the value of equity such that: 

$$S_t = V \ times N(d) - Fe^{-r(T-t)} \times N(d-\sigma\sqrt{T-t})$$

where:
* $d = \frac{ln(\frac{V}{Fe^{-r(T-t)}})}{\sigma\sqrt{T-t}} + \frac{1}{2}\sigma\sqrt{T-t}$
* v = the value of the firm
* F = the face value of the Debt maturing at T
* $$\sigma$$ = the volatility of the value of the firm
* r = the annual interest rate
* N(d) = cumulative normal distribution function evaluated at d

**The Value of Debt at Time t**

There's two ways to value the Debt at T
* Risk-free debt minus a put option on the firm
* Firm value minus equity value

Given the current value of the firm is 60m and the face value of the bond is 50m, the annual interest rate is 5% and the volatility of the firm's value is 10%. The equity value is 17m

Method 1

$D_t = Fe^{-r(T-t)}$

$D_t = 50\times e^{-0.05*3} - p_t$

$D_t = 50 \times 0.8607 - p_t$

$D_T = 43.035 - p_t$

To get the value of the Put, we can use Put Call Parity

$p_t = c_t + Fe^{-r(T-t)}-V$

$p_t = c_t + 43.035 - 60$

$p_t = 17 + 43.035 - 60 = 0.035$

$D_t = 43.035 - p_t = 43.035 - 0.035 = 43$

Therefore the value of the debt is 43m USD.

Method 2

$D_t = V - S_t$

$D_t = 60 - 17 = 43$

# Credit Spreads, Time to Maturity, Interest Rates and Subordinated Debt

## Credit Spreads, Time to Maturity, and Interest Rates
_LO 21b: Explain the relationship between credit spreads, time to maturity, and interest rates, and calculate credit spread_

A credit spread is the difference between the yield on a risky credit vs. the yield on a risk-free credit and it can be calculated by: 

$$Credit \space Spread = -[\frac{1}{(T-t)}]\times ln(\frac{D}{F})-R_F$$

where: 
* (T-t) = remaining maturity
* D = current value of the debt
* F = face value of the debt
* $R_F$ = the risk free rate

Time to maturity affects credit spreads; as time to maturity increases, both low and high-rated issue credit spreads are commonly observed to widen. As interest rates increase (decrease), the expected value of the firm at maturity increases and therefore the risk of default will be reduced. 

**Example**

The face value of debt is 100m USD and time to maturity is 5 years. The current value of the debt is 77m USD and the risk free rate is 4%. 

$$Credit \space Spread = -(\frac{1}{5}) \times ln(\frac{77}{100}) - 0.04$$

$$Credit \space Spread = -(0.2 \times -0.261) - 0.04 = 0.0122 = 1.22%$$

## Subordinate Debt
_LO 21c: Explain the differences between valuing senior and subordinated debt using a contingent claim approach and LO 21d: Explain, from a contingent claim perspective, the impact of stochastic interest rates on the valuation of risky bonds, equity, and the risk of default_

Subordinate debt behaves somewhat more like equity than debt (for some factors), given that subordinate debt value increases along with firm value volatility.  As interest rates rise, generally both debt and equity values will decrease. One of the major limitations of the Merton model is that it cannot handle jumps - this is problematic as many default events are surprises. 

# Credit Risk Portfolio Models
_LO 21e: Compare and contrast different approaches to credit risk modeling, such as those related to the Merton Model, CreditRisk+, CreditMetrics, and the KMV model._

CreditRisk+ models several factors or exposures for each obligor and adjusts them so that the mean is 1. CreditMetrics is used for determining the credit value at risk (VaR) for large portfolios of debt claims. Moody's KMV Portfolio Manager determines Expected Default Frequencies for each obligor. CreditPortfolioView models transition matricies using macroeconomic or economic cycle data. 

Credit Risk Portfolio Models have limitations, however, such as having difficulties accounting for changes in interest rates, credit spreads, and current economic conditions. 

# Credit Derivatives
_LO 21f: Assess the credit risks of derivatives and LO 21g: Describe a credit derivative, credit default swap and total return swap_

A credit derivative is a contract with payoffs contingent on a specified credit event. Credit derivatives are designed as hedging instruments for credit risks. Credit derivatives are usually traded OTC. Credit Default Swaps and Total Return Swaps are examples.
