---
title: "CR-3 Capital Structure in Banks"
layout: post
---
Loss metrics such as unexpected losses, and diversification effects from correlation. 

# Capital Structure In Banks

## Credit Risk Factors
_LO 19b: Identify and describe important factors used to calculate economic capital for credit risk: probaility of default, exposure and loss rate_

Probability of Default (PD) - also known as Expected Default Frequency (EDF) - is the likelihood that a borrower will default. The exposure amount (EA) is also referred to as exposure at default (EAD), and is stated as a dollar amount. The Loss Rate (LR) is also referred to as Loss Given Default (LGD) and is the likely percent of an asset which will be lost in the event of a default. 

## Expected Loss
_LO 19c: Define and calculate expected loss (EL)_

Expected Loss is defined as the anticipated deterioration in the value of a risky asset that the bank has taken onto it's balance sheet. 

$$EL = EA \times PD \times LR$$

## Unexpected Loss
_LO 19d and LO 19e: Define and calculate unexpected loss (UL) and Estimate the variance of default probability assuming a binomial distribution_

Unexpected Loss is the variation in expected loss. If $UL_H$ denotes the unexpected loss at the horizon for asset value then $V_H$ then…

$$UL_H \equiv \sqrt{VAR(V_H)}$$

and after some algebra we can arrive at…

$$UL = EA \times \sqrt{PD \times \sigma^{2}_{LR}+LR^{2} \times \sigma^{2}_{PD}}$$

and if we assume that the asset is in a two-state model (either not defaulted or defaulted) the variance of the Probability of Default is the variance of a binomial random variable…

$$\sigma^{2}_{PD}=PD\times(1-PD)$$

## Portfolio Expected and Unexpected Loss
_LO 19f: Calculate UL for a portfolio and the UL contribution of each asset_

The Expected Loss on a Portfolio, $EL_P$ is the sum of the expected losses of each asset…

$$EL_P=\sum_{i}EL_{i} = \sum_{i}(EA_i \times LR_i \times PD_i)$$

The calculation of portfolio unexpected loss, $UL_P$ is more complicated as we need to take into account the correlation between each asset in the portfolio…

$$UL_P = \sqrt{\sum_{i}\sum_{j}\rho_{ij}UL_iUL_j}$$

But if the correlation between all assets is 1 then it actually is the sum of all unexpected losses. To determine how much each asset contributes, you take each asset (considering there's two assets in the portfolio for example)…

$$RC_1 = UL_1 \times \frac{UL_1 + (\rho_{1,2}\times UL_2)}{UL_P}$$

$$RC_2 = UL_2 \times \frac{UL_2 + (\rho_{1,2}\times UL_1)}{UL_P}$$

In general if a portfolio is big enough, then firm-specific risk will likely be diversified away, however contrary to this, calculating the cross-prodct default probabilities for large portfolios is intensely coplicated. We should consider using factor exposures when looking at this sort of calculation.

## Economic Capital for Credit Risk
_LO 19a and LO 19g: Evaluate a bank's economic capital relative to its level of credit risk and Describe how economic capital is derived_ 

Excess capital required to match the bank's estimate of unexpected loss is referred to as economic capital. 

$$economic \space capital_P = UL_P \times CM$$

## Modeling Credit Risk
_LO 19h and LO 19i: Explain how the credit loss distribution is modeled and Describe challenges to quantifying credit risk_

The beta distribution is used when estimating economic capital for credit risk, in addition to Monte Carlo simulations. 

The challenges to bottom-up risk management frameworks that attempt to quantify credit risk include…

1. Credits are presumed to be illiquid assets, and with a bottom-up approach, credit losses are measured by their risk contribution and are not influenced by the correlation of risk factors like they are in liquid markets
2. Credit risk models in practice use a one-year time horizon
3. In practice it would be good to use expected and unexpected changes in the credit quality of borrowers which occur over several years, but this is difficult in reality
4. Operational and Market Risk are often not included explicitly in Credit Risk analysis
