---
title: "Volatility Smiles"
layout: post
---

# The Volatility Smile
*Define volatility smile and volatility skew* and *Compare the shape of the volatility smile (or skew) to the shape of the implied distribution of the underlying asset price and the pricing of options on the underlying asset*

Using the Black Scholes model, we can determine implied volatility levels using strike prices. If we look at extreme out-of-the-money (OTM) options, we can see that implied volatility curves upwards, creating a "smile" function profile. 

*Describe characteristics of foreign exchange rate distributions and their implications on option prices and implied volatility* and *Describe the volatility smile for equity options and foreign currency options and provide possible explanations for its shape*

Implied volatilities for options which are deep OTM and in-the-money (ITM) will exhibit an upward sloping curve versus the at-the-money (ATM) options if traders think that extreme movements are likely. Volatility does not remain constant and often moves in step with regime changes, in which periods of low volatility are followed by periods of high volatility. If this is the case, then should a significant move happen, market participants might price-in the likelihood of extreme movements more aggressively.

For Equity options, often we can observe a volatility skew or "smirk" because traders often price-in the likelihood of a huge decrease in value of the underlying equity. Essentially this reflects the appeal of insurance against market crashes. 

*Explain the implications of put-call parity on the implied volatility of call and put options*
*Describe alternative ways of characterizing the volatility smile*

We can examine and observe volatility smiles by replacing the equity price in the $(X / S_0)$ term with the forward price for the equity, which is essentially the same, but taking risk-free rates, which will be baked into the forward price. We can also substitute the equity price with the options' delta, or finally, with the strike price alone. 

*Describe volatility term structures and volatility surfaces and how they may be used to price options*
In a state of nature where short term volatility is lower than historical averages, then we typically expect volatility to be an upward-sloping function; vice-versa in the case of high volatility levels - we expect volatilities to be downward sloping. This is somewhat related to the concept of mean-reverting volatility. We can create a volatility surface by combining volatility smiles and the volatility term structure. This volatility surface can be used to validate model correctness when traders come up with pricing models. 

*Explain the impact of the volatility smile on the calculation of "the Greeks”*
Volatility smiles will impact the calculation of delta, gamma, vega, and other such option greeks; as each of these option greeks functions are dependant on implied volatility for their outcomes. 

*Explain the impact of a single asset price jump on a volatility smile*
Price jumps - which manifest in the form of rapid price changes - will result in implied volatilities for ATM options being higher than those of OTM or ITM options, given the expectation that prices might jump and the option might quickly jump towards the ATM point.
