---
title: "The Evolution of Short Rates and the Shape of the Term Structure"
layout: post
---
How interest rate expectations shape the yield curve.

# Interest Rate Term Structures
*LO 12a: Explain the role of interest rate expectations in determining the shape of the term*

**Flat Yield Curve**
The yield curve is flat when discount rates for 1, 2, 3 or more years at the same rate. The curve on a graph appears as a flat line.

**Upward-Sloping Yield Curve** 
Upward-sloping yield curves usually represent normality and signifiy that investors expect that 1 year, 2 year, 3 year and so-on spot rates in x years' time will increase. This results in upward-sloping spot rates for x-year investments. 

**Downward-Sloping Yield Curve**
Upward-sloping yield curves usually signify that investors expect that 1 year, 2 year, 3 year and so-on spot rates in x years' time will decrease. This results in downward-sloping spot rates for x-year investments. 

Although market expectations of future interest rates can help us predict the shape of the yield curve in the front-periods (short term) it is unlikely that our expectations will be as effective at predicting interests rates in the long run (e.g. 15 or more years from now). In general we could think of the yield curve as incorporating opinions about economic policy implementations in the short term, the medium term effects of those policies, and lnog run inflation expetations in the long term, among other things.

# Interest Rate Volatility
*LO 12b: Apply a risk-neutral interest rate tree to assess the effect of volatility on the shape of the term structure*

Interest Rate expections among market participants will differ, and given that the current discount rates reflect the various different expectations of market participants, future spot rates will be lowered. This is because spot rates will incorporate the outcomes of each decision tree state.

# Interest Rate Gamma
*LO 12c: Estimate the convexity effect using Jensen’s inequality* and *LO 12d: Evaluate the impact of changes in maturity, yield and volatility on the convexity of a security*

Interest Rate Gamma/Convexity can be determined by applying a modified version of Jensen's Alpha, which is given as...

$$E\left[\frac{1}{1+r}\right] > \frac{1}{E[1+r]}$$

Which is the discount rate given by the sum of the expected discount rates, versus the individual expected rate. E.g. if we expect rates to be 50/50% split between 10 and 10% respectively, but we expect the rate to end up being 15%, we compare the discount rate given by 0.5 * (1/1.1) + 0.5 * (1/1.2) against the discount rate given by 1 * (1/1.15).

# Risk Premium
*LO 12e: Calculate the price and return of a zero-coupon bond incorporating a risk premium*

Given the previous example, a risk-neutral price for a 1-year asset would be a discount using 15% interest rates. However, given they could be either 10 or 20, a rational investor will require some sort of risk premium for purchasing this asset. This can be calculated when determining discount rates for each year by adding the risk premium required to the expected interest rates. For example, a 50 basis point risk premium requirement would manifest as 1/1.105 and 1/1.205.

__References__
Bruce Tuckman and Angel Serrat, Fixed Income Securities: Tools for Today’s Markets, 3rd Edition (Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011). Chapter 6. Empirical Approaches to Risk Metrics and Hedging
