---
title: "CR-2 The Credit Analyst"
layout: post
---
An overview of the role of the Credit analyst.

# The Credit Analyst
The role and responsibilities of a Credit Analyst.

## Banking Credit Analysts
_LO 18a: Describe the quantitative, qualitative and research skills a banking credit analyst is expected to have._

There are three main types of Credit Analyst tasks: 

**Counterparty Credit Analysts** perform risk evaluations on a given entity, either as a result of a periodic review, or on an ad-hoc basis due to an upcoming transaction with the entity. 

**Fixed-Income Analysts** provide recommendations regarding the decision to buy, sell or hold debt securities. They must perform both fundamental and technical analysis to determine fair values and whether an asset is under, over, or fairly valued. 

**Equity Analysts** analyse publically traded financial institutions to determine whether an investor should buy, sell or hold equity shares. 

The skills involved in these tasks involve both qualitative and qualitative aptitude, as well as the ability to research and to utilise primary and secondary sources of data. 

## Information Sources
_LO 18b: Assess the quality of various sources of information used by a credit analyst_

Annual Reports, Auditor's Reports, Financial Statements - both annual and interim, the Bank's Website, News Sites, the Internet, and Securities Pricing data, Prospectuses, Regulatory Filings, and Ratings Agency reports can be used as a source of information for Credit Analysis tasks. 

## The CAMEL System
_LO 18c: Explain the CAMEL system used for evaluating the financial condition of a bank_

The CAMEL system encompasses the following five factors of a bank's financial health: 

* Capital
* Asset Quality
* Management
* Earnings
* Liquidity

Each factor or characteristic can be given a rating out of five and an overall grading can be achieved by aggregating/averaging across each characteristic.
