---
title: "The Art of Term Structure Models: Volatility and Distribution"
layout: post
---
Time-varying volatility using the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross (CIR) and lognormal models.

# Time-Varying Volatility Models
*Describe the short-term rate process under a model with time-dependent volatility*
In order for us to incorporate time-dependent volatility into a short-rate model, we must specify a volatility term which is a function of time. We can denote the change in short rates will follow the following process...

$$dr = \lambda (t) dt + \sigma (t) dw$$

Where $\sigma (t)$ is the basis points standard deviation at time t. Our model is now time-dependent as it references standard deviation specifically at time t.

## Model 3
*Calculate the short-term rate change and determine the behaviour of the standard deviation of the rate change using a model with time-dependent volatility* and *Assess the efficacy of time-dependent volatility models*
If we assume that - in the long-run - interest rates converge on a mean value, perhaps with drift, then we can account for time-varying volatility by using an exponential decay of volatility. This assumes that as time progresses, volatility decays in an exponential function shape. This is called Model 3 and is given by...

$$dr = \lambda (t) dt + \sigma e^{-\alpha t} dw$$

Where...
- $\sigma$ = the volatility at inception, or at time 0
- $\lambda$ = the drift term

An issue with the Model 3 approach is that the term structure of interest rates shifts in a parallel fashion each time the rate changes. The model does not incorporate any flattening or steepening of the term structure for each interest rate change. Time dependant volatility models require that we forecast volatility potentially far off into the future. It is unrealistic to expect that we can do this with accuracy; the Model 3 approach provides a compromise to this by reducing volatility to 0, or some other long-run figure, as time passes.

# Cox-Ingersoll-Ross & Lognormal Models
*Describe the short-term rate process under the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross (CIR) and lognormal models* and *Calculate the short-term rate change and describe the basis point volatility using the CIR and lognormal models.*

An issue with the models above is that the basis point volatility of the short term rate is independent of the actual short term rate itself. The basis points volatility does not consider - for example - whether interest rates are extremely high, or extremely low. Should they be extremely low, for example, we may be bounded below by zero and thus volatility would be skewed to the upside. The Cox-Ingersoll-Ross model takes this into account by making the annualised volatility a function of the square root of the short rate. The volatility term is scaled by $\sqrt{r}$. The full form of the CIR model is...

$$dr = k(\theta - r) dt + \sigma \sqrt{r} dw$$

Where...
* $dr$ = change in the interest rate
* $k$ = speed of the interest rate mean reversion
* $\theta$ = the long run value of the short term rate
* $r$ = the current interest rate
* $dt$ = change in time
* $\sigma$ = basis points volatility

We can also use a model called the lognormal model which is given by...

$$dr = ardt + \sigma rdw$$

The CIR and lognormal short rate models will always produce a non-negative interest rate and will be skewed to the right, as compared to a normal distribution which can facilitate negative rates. 

## Adding Drift & Mean Reversion
*Describe log-normal models with deterministic drift and Mean Reversion*

You can add drift to the lognormal model by doing...$ln r_0 + a_ndt+n \times \sigma \sqrt{dt}$ at each node. We can incorporate mean reversion by doing...$d[ln(r)] = k(t)[ln\theta(t) - ln(r)]dt + \sigma (t)dw$.  
