---
title: "The Credit Decision"
layout: post
---
An overview of the Credit decision process and analysis.

# The Credit Decision

## Credit Risk
*LO 17a: Define credit risk and explain how it arises using examples*

Credit is an agreement where one party recieves something of value and agrees to pay for a good or service at a later date. Credit Risk is the probability that the borrower will not pay the amount back, and this risk arises from…

* Default on the financial obligation or the odds of this increasing
* A more severe loss than expected due to greater exposure, or lower recovery rate than expected at default
* Defaulting on goods or services which are already provided (settlement risk)

## Credit Risk Evaluation Components
*LO 17b and LO 17c: Explain the components of credit risk evaluation and Describe, compare and contrast various credit risk mitigants and their role in credit analysis*

The four primary components of credit risk evaluation are…

1. The borrower's (or obligor's) capacity and willingness to pay back the loan
2. The external environment and its effect on the borrower's capacity and willingness to repay the borrowed funds
3. The characteristics of the credit instrument
4. The quality and adequacy of risk mitigants such as collateral, credit enhancements, and loan gaurantees

## Qualitative and Quantitative Techniques
*LO 17d: Compare and contrast quantitative and qualitative techniques of credit risk evaluation*

Willingness to repay loans is a subjective matter, and we must make judgements about the borrower in this respect. Qualitative methods of doing this includes: 

* Gathering information from various sources
* Face-to-Face meetings to discuss important topics
* "Name Lending" by relying on reputation or brand value
* Extrapolate past performance into the future

We should also consider risk ratings, specifically Soverign Risk Ratings and relevant legal systems, when performing this analysis. Quantitative analysis can have some drawbacks, as ultimately we're projecting future behaviour based on past data. 

# Credit Analysis, Quantitative Measures, and Failure vs. Insolvency
_LO 17e: Compare the credit analysis of consumers, corporations, financial institutions and soverigns_

The four basic types of borrowers are Consumers, Corporations, Financial Institutions and Governents (or related entities). Generally each of these types of entities have different scope and behaviour of lending norms. 

## Quantitative Measures
_LO 17f: Describe quantitative measurements an factors of credit risk, including probability of default, loss given default, exposure at default, expected loss and time horizon_

The main measures of determining credit-worthiness are:

* Probability of Default (PD)
* Loss Given Default (LGD)
* Exposure at Default (EAD)
* Expected Loss (EL)
* Time Horizon

## Failure vs. Insolvency
_LO 17g: Compare bank failure and bank insolvency_

Bank failure is not the same as bank insolvency. Banks can often become insolvent and become merged with one another, forming new entities. Bank failures are supposed to be, or are assumed to be, common, but in reality they are not. 
