---
title: "Correlation in Financial Markets"
layout: post
---
We examine the role that correlation plays in financial markets, using examples from products including Credit Defualt Swaps (CDS), collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) and multi-asset correlation options. 

# Financial Correlation Risk
Correlation risk measures the risk of losses arising from changes in correlations between assets. Correlations between assets - both financial and non-financial in nature - can be either Static or Dynamic. Static correaltions remain fixed whereas Dynamic correlations are time-varying. 

Correlation can present problems when measuring the risk of various financial assets. Credit Default Swaps (CDS), for example, can potentially exhibit *Wrong Way Risk* if the reference object and the issuer exhibit positive default correlation to each other. A further complication is that the spread between a CDS and the object it references can be *nonmonotonous*, meaning that the spread changes over time given changes in correlation. 

## Correlations in Financial Investments
The standard deviation of a portfolio is determined by the variances of each asset, the position size weights of the asset, and the covariance between each asset. For a two-position portfolio, the portfolio standard deviation is...

$$\sigma_p = \sqrt{W^{2}_{X}\sigma^{2}_{X}+W^{2}_{Y}\sigma^{2}_{Y}+W_{X}W_{Y}COV_{XY}}$$

As a refresher, the Variance of an asset X is $(X_t - \mu_t)^2$ and the covariance of asset X and Y is $(X_t - \mu_X) \times (Y_t - \mu_Y)$.

## Correlation in Trading with Multi-Asset Options
There are various assets which can be traded, whose values are determined by the correlation between assets. The following is a summary of the payoff profile of some of thse assets...

| Correlation Strategies               | Payoff                                     |
|--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------|
| Option on higher of two stocks       | $max(S_1,S_2)$                             |
| Call option on the max of two stocks | $max[0, max(S_1, S_2)-K]$                  |
| Exchange option                      | $max(0, S_2 - S_1)$                        |
| Spread call option                   | $max(0, S_2 - S_1$ - K)                    |
| Dual-strike call option              | $max(0, S_1 - K_1, S_2 - K_2)$             |
| Portfolio of Basket Option           | $max[\sum^{n}_{i=1}n_i \times S_i - K, 0]$ |

# Correlation Risk Management, Correlation Swaps, and the 2007/8 Financial Crisis

## Risk Management
The formula for calculating VAR using the variance-covariance method is...

$$VAR_p = \sigma_p\alpha\sqrt{x}$$

Where...
* $\sigma_p$ is portfolio daily volatility
* $\alpha$ is the z value from the standard normal distribution (or the significance level)
* $x$ is the number of trading days

Within $\sigma_p$ the correlation of assets in the portfolio is defined as...

$$\sigma_p = \sqrt{\beta_h\times C \times\beta_v}$$

Where...
* $\beta_h$ is the horizontal beta vector
* $C$ is the coraviance matrix of returns
* $\beta_v$ is the vertical beta vector

Computing portfolio VAR using the variance-covariance method by hand is burdensome, but not impossible. An example is provided below. 

*Example Portfolio VAR Calculation*

Assume we have a two-asset portfolio with positions of 8m in Asset A, 4m in Asset B, a correlation coefficient of 0.6 with daily standard deviations of 1.5% and 2% for Assets A and B respectively. What is the 10-Day VAR at the 99% confidence level for this portfolio?

In order to apply our $VAR_p = \sigma_p\alpha\sqrt{x}$ formula, we need the $\sigma_p$ parameter, which is dependant on a covariance matrix.

$$\begin{pmatrix}
cov_{11} & cov_{12} \\ 
cov_{21} & cov_{22}
\end{pmatrix}
= 
\begin{pmatrix}
\sigma^{2}_{1} & \rho_{12}\times\sigma_1\times\sigma_2 \\ 
\rho_{12}\times\sigma_1\times\sigma_2 & \sigma^{2}_{2}
\end{pmatrix}$$

$$\begin{pmatrix}
0.015^2 & 0.6\times0.015\times0.02 \\ 
0.6\times0.015\times0.02 & 0.02^2
\end{pmatrix}
= 
\begin{pmatrix}
0.000225 & 0.00018 \\ 
0.00018 & 0.0004
\end{pmatrix}$$

This process gives us the covariance matrix. We will now use the formula $\sigma_p = \sqrt{\beta_h\times C \times\beta_v}$ as mentioned before. 

*Step 1: Multiply the Horizontal Beta Vector by the covariance matrix*

$$\beta_h * C= [8\,\,4] * \begin{pmatrix}0.000225 & 0.00018\\0.00018 & 0.0004 \end{pmatrix}$$

$$= [(8\times0.000225)+(4\times0.00018)\,\,\,(8\times0.00018)+(4\times0.0004)]$$

$$=[0.00252\,\,\,0.00304]$$

*Step 2: Multiply the Vertical Beta Vector by the results of Step 1*

$$(\beta_h\times C)\times\beta_v$$

$$= [0.00252\,\,\,0.00304]\begin{bmatrix} 8\\4\end{bmatrix}$$

$$= (0.00252\times8)+(0.00304\times4) = 0.03232$$

*Step 3: Compute $\sigma_p$ by square-rooting the result*

$$\sigma_p = \sqrt{(\beta_h\times C)\times\beta_v} = \sqrt{0.03232} = 0.01798 \,or\, 17.98\%$$

*Step 4: Compute the original formula for Portfolio VAR*

$$VAR_p = \sigma_p\alpha\sqrt{x} = 0.1798\times2.33\times\sqrt{10} = 1.3248$$

The value is in terms of $USD millions. Note the BASEL committe requires banks to hold at least three times their 10-Day VAR to finance the trading book. 

## Correlation Swaps
It is possible to purchase or sell correlation risk, or time-varying correlation, via the use of Correlation Swaps. The payoff of these swaps for a buyer is $notional\,amount \times (\rho_{realised}-\rho_{fixed})$, where...

$$\rho_{realised} = \frac{2}{n^2-n}\sum_{i>j}\rho_{i,j}$$

# Correlations During Different Economic States
At a high level, equity correlations are highest in times of recessions and lowest in times of economic expansions. equity correlation volatility however is highest in normal market conditions however, as there is uncertainty around which direction the economy will go. In other words; equity correlation gamma is high.

## Mean Reversion & Autocorrelation
Mean reversion is statistically defined as...

$$\frac{\delta(S_t - S_{t-1})}{\delta(S_t-1)}$$

The rate at which a variable returns to its long-run mean is defined as mean reversion speed...

$$S_t - S_{t-1} = a(\mu - S_{t-1})\Delta t + \sigma_S\epsilon\sqrt{\delta t}$$

We can simplify this by removing $\sigma_S\epsilon\sqrt{\Delta t}$ and assuming that $\Delta t$ is 1...

$$S_t - S_{t-1} = a(\mu - S_{t-1})$$

We can determine mean reversion rate by running a standard regression in which we transform $S_t - S_{t-1} = a(\mu - S_{t-1})$ into a usual regression equation:

$$S_t - S_{t-1} = Y; a\mu - \alpha; -aS_{t-1} = \beta X$$

The beta coefficient here is the negative of the mean reversion rate. -0.78 for example means 78% mean reversion. 

*Autocorrelation* measures the correlation coefficient of a variable to its previous variable. Autocorrelation can be thought of as the opposite of mean-version, where autocorrelation identifies tendancies for values to be pulled towards the most recent observations. 

*Note* the Autocorrelation rate is = 1-Mean Reversion Rate

Autocorrelation for a 1-period lag is...

$$AC(\rho_t, \rho_{t-1}) = \frac{cov(\rho_t, \rho_{t-1})}{\sigma(\rho_t)\times(\sigma_{t-1})}$$
