---
title: "The Art of Term Structure Models: Drift"
layout: post
---
Term structure models for estimating short-term interest rates.

# Term Structure Models
*LO 13a: Construct and describe the effectiveness of a short-term interest rate tree assuming normally distributed rates, both with and without drift* and *LO 13b: Calculate the short-term rate change and standard deviation of the rate change using a model with normally distributed rates and no drift*

If there is no drift in short term interest rates, and if the change in interest rates are normally distributed, then the continuously compounded instantaneous rate will change over time as follows...

$$dr = \sigma dw$$

Where...
* dr = change in interest rates for a small period of time
* dt = a small change in time, measured in years
* $$\sigma$$ = annual basis point volatility of interest rate changes
* dw = a normally distributed random variable with $N(0, \sqrt{dt})$ 

If we are to make an interest rate tree using this simple model, our odds of an up or down move will be 50% each way. The formula of $dr = \sigma dw$ can be applied by substituting each term given with actual values.

We can build an interest rate tree using this method by applying the formula $r_0 + x \times (\sigma \sqrt{dt})$  for an up move, or substitute - for + for a down move; where x is the node in the tree. For example, the third node in the tree would be $r_0+2\sigma\sqrt{dt}$

## Dealing with Negative Interest Rates
*LO 13c: Describe methods for addressing the possibility of negative short-term rates in term structure models*

To cap interest rates at zero - should we want to do so - we can either use a distribution which does not have values below zero, such as the chi-squared or lognormal distribution; or we can simply floor the value at zero. The issue of using chi-squared or lognormal distributions is that we may introduce skew into the model. 

## Introducing Drift
*LO 13d: Construct a short-term rate tree under the Ho-Lee Model with time-dependent drift*

"Model 1" interest rate trees forecast a flat term structure, which is not congruent with empirically observed term structures, in most cases. To account for the increased risk premiums required by investors as time horizons increase, we should incorporate drift into the previous formula. We can extend $dr = \sigma dw$ to...

$$dr = \lambda dt + \sigma dw$$

Where $\lambda$ is a constant drift term. As with the previous method, if we want to make an interest rate tree with this approach, we can use the following formula: $r_0 + + x \times (\lambda dt) + x \times (\sigma \sqrt{dt})$ for an up move, or substitute - for + for a down move.

The Ho-Lee Model extends this approach further by incorporating time-dependent drift. The formula above assumes that drift is constant throughout the term structure. The Ho-Lee model allows us to have different drifts at different times. This is done by applying the following formula...

$$r_0 + (\lambda_1 + \lambda_{...} + \lambda_{n})dt + x \ times \sigma \sqrt{dt}$$

...for an up move, substituting - for + for a down move. Here we are simply adding the drifts at each point in time to the overall drift term.

# Arbitrage Free Term Structure Models
*LO 13e: Describe uses and benefits of the arbitrage-free models and assess the issue of fitting models to market prices*

Arbitrage-free models can be used to value instruments which are illiquid, customised, or which are based on an underlying security with observable prices. Arbitrage free models, however, do not take into account market imbalances. 

## The Vasicek Term Structure Model
*LO 13f: Describe the process of constructing a simple and recombining tree for a short-term rate under the Vasicek Model with Mean Reversion* and *LO 13g: Calculate the Vasicek Model rate change, the standard deviation of the rate change, the expected rate in T years and half-life*

The Vasicek Term Structure Model assumes that short rates exhibit mean reversion to a level which reflects macro policies, economic  health, and other such factors. The model is given by...

$$dr = k(\theta - r)dt + \sigma dw$$

Where...
* k = mean version speed
* $\theta$ = long run short rate
* r = current interest rate

If we want to determine the interest rate in T years, we can calculate this as...

$$(\theta - r)\times e^(-kT)$$

and to determine the half-life of this interest rate arriving at the mean-reverting level we can do...

$$ln(2) / k$$

## Comments on the Vasicek Model
*LO 13h: Describe the effectiveness of the Vasicek Model*

The Vasicek model generally overstates short term rates and understates long term rates, as the mean reversion parameter produces estimates which exhibit declining volatility over time. Given that the volatility curve in the Vasicek model is downward sloping, it doesn't take into account exogenous liquidity shocks very well either. 
